==================================
The problem of defining the zodiac
==================================

Western astrology mostly uses the tropical zodiac, in which 0° Aries is fixed
at the vernal point. The vernal point is the point where the Sun is located at
the spring equinox. By contrast, sidereal astrology uses a sidereal zodiac whose
initial point is defined relative to the fixed stars. Sidereal astrology has a
western as well as an eastern tradition.

Since the vernal point makes a slow motion relative to the fixed stars, the
so-called precession of the equinox (1° in 71.6 years), the tropical and the
sidereal zodiacs slowly drift apart. About 1500 - 2000 years ago, both zodiacs
almost perfectly agreed with each other. However, in our time, the difference
between them amounts to more than 20° and continues increasing.

While the definition of the tropical zodiac is very obvious and never
questioned by astrologers, sidereal astrologers unfortunately disagree about
where exactly in the sky the initial point of the sidereal zodiac should be
located. There are numerous divergent ideas about it and, consequently, a
considerable number of different ayanamshas. New ayanamshas are invented almost
every year. Beginners in sidereal astrology are confronted with the difficult
problem of deciding which ayanamsha to use, unless they choose to follow the
recommendation of their teacher. Hindu astrologers and their western disciples
mostly use the so-called Lahiri ayanamsha, whereas the western sidereal
tradition mostly uses the Fagan/Bradley Ayanamsha.

Nowadays, sidereal ephemerides are derived from tropical ephemerides by
subtracting a certain difference value from the tropical positions of the
planets. This difference value is called ayanamsha. The Sanskrit term ayanāṃśaḥ
is composed of the words ayanam, "course (of the Sun), half-year" and aṃśaḥ,
"part", thus literally means "part of the course". It refers to the distance of
a solstice from the initial point of the cardinal zodiac sign that is
associated with it. This distance equals the distance of the vernal point from
the sidereal Aries point. (The correct pronunciation of ayanāṃśaḥ is with "sh",
although many write and pronounce it with an "s".)

Thus, sidereal planetary positions are usually computed from tropical positions
using the equation: ``sidereal_position = tropical_position – ayanamsha(t)``
where ayanamsha is the difference between the two zodiacs at a given epoch.

The value of the ayanamsha of date is usually computed from the ayanamsha value
at a particular start date and the speed of the vernal point, the so-called
precession rate, in ecliptic longitude.

The zero point of the sidereal zodiac is therefore traditionally defined by the
equation: ``sidereal_0_Aries = tropical_0_Aries + ayanamsha(t)``.

As has been stated, the number of existing ayanamshas is considerable. The
Swiss Ephemeris offers more than forty of them. At first glance, they all look
arbitrary in their definitions, and there is no striking evidence – from a mere
astronomical point of view – for anyone of them. However, a historical study
shows at least that many of them are related to each other and the basic
approaches are not so many.

..
