================
Other ayanamshas
================

True Mula Ayanamsha (K. Chandra Hari)
=====================================

:Sweph n°: ``SIDM_TRUE_MULA`` (35)

With this ayanamsha, the star Mula (λ Scorpionis) is assumed at 0° Sagittarius.

The Indian astrologer Chandra Hari is of the opinion that the lunar mansion
Mula corresponds to the Muladhara Chakra. He refers to the doctrine of the
Kalapurusha which assigns the 12 zodiac signs to parts of the human body. The
initial point of Aries is considered to correspond to the crown and Pisces to
the feet of the cosmic human being. In addition, Chandra Hari notes that Mula
has the advantage to be located near the galactic centre and to have "no proper
motion". This ayanamsha is very close to the Fagan/Bradley ayanamsha. Chandra
Hari believes it defines the original Babylonian zodiac.

(In reality, however, the star Mula (λ Scorpionis) has a small proper motion,
too. As has been stated, the position of the galactic centre was not known to
the ancient peoples. However, they were aware of the fact that the Milky Way
crossed the ecliptic in this region of the sky.)

**Sources:**

 K. Chandra Hari, "On the Origin of Sidereal Zodiac and Astronomy", in: Indian
 Journal of History of Science, 33(4) 1998.

 Chandra Hari, "Ayanāṃśa", xa.yimg.com/kq/groups/26252194/1355927039/name/Ayanamsha.pdf.

 http://www.indiadivine.org/content/topic/1229109-true-ayanamsha-views-of-chandra-hari/.

---

The following ayanamshas were provided by Graham Dawson ("Solar Fire"), who had
taken them over from Robert Hand's Program "Nova". Some were also contributed
by David Cochrane. Explanations by D. Koch:

De Luce Ayanamsha
=================

:Sweph n°: ``SIDM_DELUCE`` (2)

This ayanamsha was proposed by the American astrologer Robert DeLuce
(1877-1964). It is fixed at the birth of Jesus, theoretically at 1 January 1
CE. However, DeLuce de facto used an ayanamsha of 26°24'47 in the year 1900,
which corresponds to 4 June 1 BCE as zero ayanamsha date.

DeLuce believes that this ayanamsha was also used in ancient India. He draws
this conclusion from the fact that the important ancient Indian astrologer
Varahamihira, who assumed the solstices on the ingress days of the Sun into
sidereal Cancer and Capricorn, allegedly lived in the 1st century BCE. This
dating of Varahamihira has recently become popular under the influence of Hindu
nationalist ideology (Hindutva). However, historically, it cannot be
maintained. Varahamihira lived and wrote in the 6th century CE.

**Sources:**

 Robert DeLuce, Constellational Astrology According to the Hindu System, Los
 Angeles, 1963, p. 5.

Raman Ayanamsha
===============

:Sweph n°: ``SIDM_RAMAN`` (3)

This ayanamsha was used by the great Indian astrologer Bangalore Venkata Raman
(1912-1998). It is based on a statement by the medieval astronomer Bhaskara II
(1184-1185), who assumed an ayanamsha of 11° in the year 1183 (according to
Information given by Chandra Hari, unfortunately without giving his source).
Raman himself mentioned the year 389 CE as year of zero ayanamsha in his book
Hindu Predictive Astrology, pp. 378-379.

Although this ayanamsha is very close to the galactic ayanamsha of Gil Brand,
Raman apparently did not think of the possibility to define the zodiac using
the galactic centre.

**Sources:**

 Chandra Hari, "Ayanāṃśa", xa.yimg.com/kq/groups/26252194/1355927039/name/Ayanamsha.pdf.

 B.V. Raman, Hindu Predictive Astrology, pp. 378-379.

Shri Yukteshwar Ayanamsha
=========================

:Sweph n°: ``SIDM_YUKTESHWAR`` (7)

This ayanamsha was allegedly recommended by Swami Shri Yukteshwar Giri
(1855-1936). We have taken over its definition from Graham Dawson. However, the
definition given by Yukteshwar himself in the introduction of his work The Holy
Science is a confusing. According to his "astronomical reference books", the
ayanamsha on the spring equinox 1894 was 20°54'36". At the same time he
believed that this was the distance of the spring equinox from the star Revati,
which he put at the initial point of Aries. However, this is wrong, because on
that date, Revati was actually 18°24' away from the vernal point. The error is
explained from the fact that Yukteshwar used the zero ayanamsha year 499 CE and
an inaccurate Suryasiddhantic precession rate of 360°/24'000 years = 54
arcsec/year. Moreover, Yukteshwar is wrong in assigning the above-mentioned
ayanamsha value to the year 1894; in reality it applies to 1893.

Since Yukteshwar's precession rate is wrong by 4" per year, astro.com cannot
reproduce his horoscopes accurately for epochs far from 1900. In 2000, the
difference amounts to 6'40".

Although this ayanamsha differs only a few arc seconds from the galactic
ayanamsha of Gil Brand, Yukteshwar obviously did not intend to define the
zodiac using the galactic centre. He actually intended a Revati-oriented
ayanamsha, but committed the above-mentioned errors in his calculation.

**Source:**

 Swami Sri Yukteswar, The Holy Science, 1949, Yogoda Satsanga Society of India,
 p. xx.

JN Bhasin Ayanamsha
===================

:Sweph n°: ``SIDM_JN_BHASIN`` (8)

This ayanamsha was used by the Indian astrologer J.N. Bhasin (1908-1983).

Djwhal Khul Ayanamsha
=====================

:Sweph n°: ``SIDM_DJWHAL_KHUL`` (6)

This ayanamsha is based on the assumption that the Age of Aquarius will begin
in the year 2117. This assumption is maintained by a theosophical society
called Ageless Wisdom, and bases itself on a channeled message given in 1940
by a certain spiritual master called Djwhal Khul.

Graham Dawson commented it as follows (E-mail to Alois Treindl of 12 July
1999): "The "Djwhal Khul" ayanamsha originates from information in an article
in the Journal of Esoteric Psychology, Volume 12, No 2, pp91-95, Fall 1998-1999
publ. Seven Ray Institute). It is based on an inference that the Age of
Aquarius starts in the year 2117. I decided to use the 1st of July simply to
minimize the possible error given that an exact date is not given."

On 7 July 2020, Clifford Ribaudo sent us additional information in a mail to
Alois Treindl:
"Also, I know the "real" source of the 2117 date for the DK (= Djwhal Khul)
Ayanamsa and the original provenance of it. It was not Lindsay or Robbins or
the journal of Esoteric Psychology. My friend Keith Bailey, inherited a whole
bunch of papers from Marion Walter's who was one of the members of the "DINA"
group discussed in Alice Bailey's books. DK answered a question from Roberto
Assagioli and in the answer he mentioned that "he would suggest the start of
the Aquarian Age was 177 years from the date of writing.". A copy of that
letter was given to Robbins and then at some point he mentioned it in Journal
of Esoteric Psychology."

**Sources:**

 Philipp Lindsay, "The Beginning of the Age of Aquarius: 2,117 A.D.",
 http://esotericastrologer.org/newsletters/the-age-of-aquarius-ray-and-zodiac-cycles/

 Esoteric Psychology, Volume 12, No 2, pp91-95, Fall 1998-1999 publ. Seven Ray
 Institute.

"Vedic Ayanamsha" according to Sunil Sheoran
============================================

:Sweph n°: ``SIDM_TRUE_SHEORAN`` (39)

This ayanamsha is derived from ancient Indian time cycles and astronomical
information given in the Mahabharata. Its author, Mr. Sunil Sheoran, therefore
calls this ayanamsha "Vedic".

Essential in Sheoran's argumentation is the assumption that the two
Mahabharatan solar eclipses that were observed from Kurukshetra and Dvaraka
were 18 years apart, not 36 years as is taught by tradition and the Mahabharata
itself. Also essential to Sheoran's theory is his assumption that the
traditional lengths of the yugas are too high and that in reality a period of
four yugas (caturyuga/mahāyuga) should be 120 years rather than 12.000 divine
years or 4.320.000 human years. From the mentioned eclipse pair and historical
considerations, he derives that the Mahabharata war must have taken place in
the year 827 BCE. Then he dates the beginning of the last Manvantara on the
winter solstice 4174 BCE. This is Sheoran's ayanamsha zero date, to which he
assigns the ayanamsha value -60°.

Moreover it must be mentioned that in Sheoran's opinion the nakshatra circle
does not begin at the initial point of the zodiac, but that 0° Aries
corresponds to 3°20' in Ashvini.

Unfortunately, there are serious problems at least in Sheoran linguistic
argumentation. As to the time distance between the two eclipses, the
Mahabharata itself states: ṣaṭtriṃśe varṣe, MBh 16.1.1 and 16.2.2. The correct
translation of this expression is "in the 36th year", whereas Sheoran
mistakenly attempts to read it as "3 x 6 = 18 years". In addition, in texts to
do with the durations of the yugas Sheoran reads sahasrāṇi as "10" instead of
"1000" and śatāni as "1" instead of "100". Unfortunately, Sanskrit dictionaries
and grammar do not allow such translations.

**Source:**

 Sunil Sheoran, "The Science of Time and Timeline of World History", 2017,
 http://goo.gl/av6vEH .

..
