===========================================
The sidereal zodiac and the Galactic Center
===========================================

The definition of the tropical zodiac is very simple and convincing. It starts
at one of the two intersection points of the ecliptic and the celestial
equator. Similarly, the definition for the house circle which is said to be an
analogy of the zodiac, is very simple. It starts at one of the two intersection
points of the ecliptic and the local horizon. Unfortunately, sidereal
traditions do not provide such a simple definition for the sidereal zodiac.
The sidereal zodiac is always fixed at some anchor star such as Citra (Spica),
Revati (zeta Piscium), or Aldebaran and Antares.

Unfortunately, nobody can tell why any of these stars should be so important
that it could be used as an anchor point for the zodiac. In addition, all these
solutions are unattractive in that the fixed stars actually are not fixed
forever but have a small proper motion which over a long period of time (such
as several millennia) can result in a considerable change in position. While it
is possible to tie the zodiac to the star Spica in a way that it remains at 0°
Libra for all times, all other stars would change their positions relative to
Spica and relative to this zodiac and would not be fixed at all. The appearance
of the sky changes over long periods of time. In 100.000 years, the
constellations will look very different from now, and the nakshatras (lunar
mansions) will get confused. For this reason, a zodiac defined by positions of
stars is unfortunately not able to provide an everlasting reference frame.

For such or also other reasons, some astrologers (Raymond Mardyks,
Ernst Wilhelm, Rafael Gil Brand, Nick Anthony Fiorenza) have tried to define
the sidereal zodiac using either the galactic centre or the node of the
galactic equator with the ecliptic. It is obvious that this kind of solution,
which would not depend on the position of a single star anymore, could provide
a philosophically more convincing and very stable definition of the zodiac.
Fixed stars would be allowed to change their positions over very long periods
of time, but the zodiac could still be considered fixed and "sidereal".

The Swiss astrologer Bruno Huber has pointed out that every time the Galactic
Center enters the next tropical sign, the vernal point enters the previous
sidereal sign. E.g., around the time the vernal point will enter Aquarius (at
the beginning of the so-called Age of Aquarius), the Galactic Center will enter
from Sagittarius into Capricorn. Huber also notes that the ruler of the
tropical sign of the Galactic Center is always the same as the ruler of the
sidereal sign of the vernal point (at the moment it is Jupiter, but it will be
Saturn in a few hundred years).

Galactic Center at 0 Sagittarius (and the beginning of nakshatra Mula)
======================================================================

:Sweph n°: ``SIDM_GALCENT_0SAG`` (17)

A correction of the Fagan ayanamsha by about 2 degrees or a correction of the
Lahiri ayanamsha by 3 degrees would place the Galactic Center at 0°
Sagittarius. Philosophically, this would obviously make some sense. Therefore,
we added an ayanamsha fixed at the Galactic Center in 1999 in Swiss Ephemeris
1.50, when we introduced sidereal ephemerides (suggestion by D. Koch, without
any astrological background).

Galactic Center at 0 Capricorn (Cochrane Ayanamsha)
===================================================

:Sweph n°: ``SIDM_GALCENT_COCHRANE`` (40)

A modification of this ayanamsha was proposed by David Cochrane in 2017. He
believes that it makes more sense to put the Galactic Centre at 0° Capricorn.

Dhruva Galactic Center Middle Mula Ayanamsha (Ernst Wilhelm)
============================================================

:Sweph n°: ``SIDM_GALCENT_MULA_WILHELM`` (36)

A different solution was proposed by the American astrologer Ernst Wilhelm in
2004. He projects the galactic centre on the ecliptic in polar projection, i.e.
along a great circle that passes through the celestial north pole (in Sanskrit
dhruva) and the galactic centre. The point at which this great circle cuts the
ecliptic is defined as the middle of the nakshatra Mula, which corresponds to
sidereal 6°40' Sagittarius.

For Hindu astrologers who follow a tradition oriented towards the star Revati
(ζ Piscium), this solution may be particularly interesting because when the
galactic centre is in the middle of Mula, then Revati is almost exactly at the
position it has in Suryasiddhanta, namely 29°50 Pisces. Also interesting in
this context is the fact that the meaning of the Sanskrit word mūlam is "root,
origin". Mula may have been the first of the 27 nakshatras in very ancient
times, before the Vedic nakshatra circle and the Hellenistic zodiac were
conflated and Ashvini, which begins at 0° Aries, became the first nakshatra.

**Sources:**

 https://groups.yahoo.com/neo/groups/StudyingKala/conversations/topics/14656

 Private communication with D. Koch

Galactic Centre in the Golden Section Scorpio/Aquarius (Rafael Gil Brand)
=========================================================================

:Sweph n°: ``SIDM_GALCENT_RGILBRAND`` (30)

Another ayanamsha based on the galactic centre was proposed by the
German-Spanish astrologer Rafael Gil Brand. Gil Brand places the galactic
centre at the golden section between 0° Scorpion and 0° Aquarius. The axis
between 0° Leo and 0° Aquarius is the axis of the astrological ruler system.

This ayanamsha is very close to the ayanamsha of the important Hindu astrologer
B.V. Raman. (see below) TODO

**Sources:**

 Rafael Gil Brand, Himmlische Matrix. Die Bedeutung der Würden in der
 Astrologie, Mössingen (Chiron), 2014.

 Rafael Gil Brand, "Umrechnung von tropischen in siderische Positionen",
 http://www.astrologie-zentrum.net/index.php/8-siderischer-tierkreis/5-umrechnung

..
