============================================
The sidereal zodiac and the Galactic Equator
============================================

Another way to define the ayanamsha based on our galaxy would be to start the
sidereal ecliptic at the intersection point of the ecliptic and the galactic
plane (henceforth called the "galactic node"). At present, this point is
located near 0 Capricorn. This definition of the ayanamsha would be analogous
to the definitions of the tropical ecliptic and the house circle, both of which
are also based on intersections of great circles. However, defining this
galactic-ecliptic intersection point or node as sidereal 0 Aries would mean to
break completely with the tradition, because it is far away from the
traditional sidereal zero points.

The following ayanamshas belong in this category:

Skydram Ayanamsha (Raymond Mardyks)
===================================

:Sweph n°: ``SIDM_GALALIGN_MARDYKS`` (34)

(also known as Galactic Alignment Ayanamsha)

This ayanamsha was proposed in 1991 by the American astrologer Raymond Mardyks.
It had the value 30° on the autumn equinox 1998. Consequently, the node
(intersection point) of the galactic equator with the ecliptic was very close
to sidereal 0° Sagittarius on the same date, and there was an interesting
"cosmic alignment": The galactic pole pointed exactly towards the autumnal
equinoctial point, and the galactic-ecliptic node coincided with the winter
solstitial point (tropical 0° Capricorn).

Mardyks' calculation is based on the galactic coordinate system that was
defined by the International Astronomical Union in 1958.

**Sources:**

 Raymond Mardyks, "When Stars Touch the Earth", in: The Mountain Astrologer
 Aug./Sept. 1991, pp. 1-4 and 47-48.

 Private communication between R. Mardyks and D. Koch in April 2016.

Galactic Node at 5 Sagittarius (Fiorenza Ayanamsha)
===================================================

:Sweph n°: ``SIDM_GALEQU_FIORENZA`` (41)

Another ayanamsha based on the galactic equator. It was invented by Nick
Anthony Fiorenza and published in his book "The Star Chart. Sidereal Astrology
and the Fixed Stars" in 2001. Fiorenza thinks that 1 Jan. 2000 should be taken
as the date of the alignment of the solstitial points with the galactic node.
He assumes an ayanamsha value of exactly 25° on this date. Thus, the vernal
point fell on exactly 5° Pisces in 2000.

**Source:**

 https://www.lunarplanner.com/siderealastrology.html

Ayanamsha based on the Galactic Equator IAU 1958
================================================

:Sweph n°: ``SIDM_GALEQU_IAU1958`` (31)

This ayanamsha is based on galactic pole as defined by the IAU in 1958, and it
is assumed that the galactic equator intersects with the ecliptic at sidereal
0° Sagittarius. This ayanamsha differs from the Skydram ayanamsha by only 19
arc seconds, but from Fioreza's ayanamsha by slightly more than 5°.

Galactic Node at 0° Sagittarius
===============================

:Sweph n°: ``SIDM_GALEQU_TRUE`` (32)

The galactic pole IAU 1958 is in fact outdated. According to more recent
observations and calculations from the year 2010, the galactic node with the
ecliptic must be corrected by 3'11", and the "Galactic Alignment" preponed to
1994 (instead of 1998). With this ayanamsha, the galactic node is fixed exactly
at sidereal 0° Sagittarius.

**Source:**

 Liu/Zhu/Zhang, "Reconsidering the galactic coordinate system", Astronomy &
 Astrophysics No. AA2010, Oct. 2010, p. 8.

Ardra Galactic Plane Ayanamsha
===============================

:Sweph n°: ``SIDM_GALEQU_MULA`` (33)

(= Galactic equator cuts ecliptic in the middle of Mula and the beginning of
Ardra)

With this ayanamsha, the galactic equator cuts the ecliptic exactly in the
middle of the nakshatra Mula. This means that the Milky Way passes through the
middle of this lunar mansion. Here again, it is interesting that the Sanskrit
word mūlam means "root, origin", and it seems that the circle of the lunar
mansions originally began with this nakshatra. On the opposite side, the
galactic equator cuts the ecliptic exactly at the beginning of the nakshatra
Ārdrā ("the moist, green, succulent one", feminine).

This ayanamsha was introduced by the American astrologer Ernst Wilhelm in 2004.
He used a calculation of the galactic node by D. Koch from the year 2001, which
had a small error of 2 arc seconds. The current implementation of this
ayanamsha is based on a new position of the Galactic pole found by Chinese
astronomers in 2010.

..
