=================
Transpluto (Isis)
=================

This hypothetical planet was postulated 1946 by the French astronomer M.E.
Sevin because of otherwise unexplainable gravitational perturbations in the
orbits of Uranus and Neptune.

However, this theory has been superseded by other attempts during the following
decades, which proceeded from better observational data. They resulted in
bodies and orbits completely different from what astrologers know as
'Isis-Transpluto'. More recent studies have shown that the perturbation
residuals in the orbits of Uranus and Neptune are too small to allow
postulation of a new planet. They can, to a great extent, be explained by
observational errors or by systematic errors in sky maps.

In telescope observations, no hint could be discovered that this planet
actually existed. Rumors that claim the opposite are wrong. Moreover, all of
the transneptunian bodies that have been discovered since 1992 are very
different from Isis-Transpluto.

Even if Sevin's computation were correct, it could only provide a rough
position. To rely on arc minutes would be illusory. Neptune was more than a
degree away from its theoretical position predicted by Leverrier and Adams.

Moreover, Transpluto's position is computed from a simple Kepler ellipse,
disregarding the perturbations by other planets' gravities. Moreover, Sevin
gives no orbital inclination.

Though Sevin gives no inclination for his Transpluto, you will realize that
there is a small ecliptic latitude in positions computed by SwissEph. This
mainly results from the fact that its orbital elements are referred to epoch
5.10.1772 whereas the ecliptic changes position with time.

The elements used by SwissEph are taken from "Die Sterne" 3/1952, p. 70. The
article does not say which equinox they are referred to. Therefore, we fitted
it to the Astron ephemeris which apparently uses the equinox of 1945 (which,
however, is rather unusual!).

..
